# Scalable Time Series Forecasting with ARIMA for SystemML

SystemML is a Machine Learning Platform built for large scale analytics, that enables flexible and scalable machine learning while also accelerating exploratory algorithm devel-opment. It is providing a solution to automatically scale any algorithm to run efficiently and fast on big data. To simplify and speed up the work of data scientists it is already providing a number of machine learning algorithms to solve classifications, clustering and regression problems. But it is not yet providing any built-in solution to analyze time series data.

However, because there are so many applications for time series analysis, the demand for models that are able to fit and predict time series data is high. The ARIMA model is one of the best known time series models and used to better understand and forecast time series data. In contrast to the ARMA model, it can also handle data that shows evidence of non-stationarity and can therefore be applied to more use-cases. This report describes what time series data is and explains the different characteristics it can exhibit, such as noise, trend, cyclic and seasonal movements, pulses and steps, and stationarity. It also covers the basics of ARIMA, first explaining what Auto-regressionand Moving Average models are and then describing differencing and how this can be used to analyze non-stationarity. After that the differences between additive and multiplicative seasonal ARIMA models are also discussed. Besides the ARIMA model itself the report also explains the BFGS optimizer and the Jacobi solver which are needed to fit an ARIMA model. To explain how the ARIMA training algorithm can be applied on big data, SystemML and in particular its optimization methods are briefly described. Finally the implementation of ARIMA using the Declarative Machine Learning Language is discussed. 

By adding the mentioned ARIMA algorithm to the list of algorithms already implementedfor SystemML, data scientist can be enabled to easily work with time series data on largescale.
